Well, good afternoon.
Welcome to session 8, 008.
No, 004.
I'm sorry.
I didn't look at the screen.
004, unfortunately not 007.
I'm John Geleynse,
User Experience Evangelist here at Apple.
And this session is a fun grab bag
session of sort of misfit toys,
you know, the land of misfit toys.
These are some great technologies
that just needed a home at WWDC,
and each of them doesn't have enough
content for its own full session,
and yet they're very important
in terms of you providing a great
user experience with your product.
Now, screen savers doesn't apply
specifically to your product,
but it still is part of the
Mac OS X user experience,
and it's just a fun thing to know about.
And so we thought we would talk about it.
And we called this session out.
We called this session actually
originally Mac OS X Party Favors,
you know, lots of good things you
get at the end of a party,
birthday party.
So the first favor we're going to talk
about is the Mac OS X screen saver,
how to write a screen saver.
And I think it's just a fun diversion,
you know, when you're sick of
writing your real product,
just get off and write a really cool
screen saver would be really cool.
Finally, Mac OS X.
Finally, we have a Macintosh operating
system that can really do
some very cool screen savers.
Then favor number two,
the second topic we're going to
touch on is the preference pane,
how to write a system preference pane.
System preferences application lets
you add third party preference panes,
and there's some really specific
cases where you'd want to do this.
And so perhaps you fall
into that category in terms
of what your company does,
and so we're going to tell you how
to do that and when to do that.
Third party favor is just to
talk about the disk image.
Disk images are the preferred
format for distributing software
over the internet and for
distributing software on Mac OS X.
So we'll talk about that.
We'll talk about the new user
experience with the disk image format.
experience with the disk image
format in Mac OS X Jaguar.
And then we'll move on to an update
about the Mac OS X installer and
some of our other tools like around
the installer like PackageMaker.
So to get started,
I want to introduce Mike Trent,
who's going to talk to you
about Mac OS X screen saver.
Mike.
Thanks.
Thanks, John.
All right, well let's talk about
screen savers on Mac OS X.
First of all,
we all know what a screen saver is,
right?
Screen savers are
entertaining graphics demos,
like slide shows or virtual fish tanks,
that run when you're
away from your computer.
The screen savers can have
more serious uses too,
such as displaying marketing material.
For example,
the Apple retail stores use screen
savers to display product demos
and attract loops when people
aren't using their machines.
Well, ironically,
one thing screen savers don't
do is actually save your screen,
right?
This is especially true now that
we all have flat panel displays.
At least I hope you all have
In JAGUAR, we're going to start using the
term "screen effect" to refer to
things like screen savers to help
clear up some of this confusion.
For the purpose of this talk,
let's just call it a screen saver.
We all know what that is.
So, Mac OS X has a built-in
screen saver system.
This is great,
because now you don't have to learn
how to write your own anymore.
You don't have to know
how to patch into the OS.
You can just focus on writing
your own module to do your
own screen saver effect.
The screen saver system is built
around a Cocoa-based framework,
but you don't need to know much
about Cocoa or Objective-C to
write a screen saver.
For the most part,
you can focus on the graphics libraries
you're already familiar with right now.
The screen saver engine is a
normal Mac OS X application.
The screen saver engine is the
software that does all the real
work for your screen saver.
It runs the graphics and all of that.
Because it's a normal
Mac OS X application,
it runs in its own address space.
This means that your screen saver can't
interfere with the system at large,
nor can the system interfere with you.
So that's exciting.
So screen save r modules are
really bundles that encapsulate
executable code and other resources.
The screen save r modules and the
screen save r engine communicate
using a central framework called
the screen save r framework.
So what can the screen save
r framework do for you?
The screen save r framework
supplies two Cocoa objects you can
use in your screen save r module.
The first object is
called screen save r view.
Screen save r view is responsible
for drawing to the screen
and handling user input.
Every screen save r module
will inherit from this object.
It is the heart of a
screen save r module.
The second object,
screen save r defaults,
is a utility for managing
user preferences.
We'll talk more about that in a minute.
Right now let's focus
on screen save r view.
Again, screen save r view is responsible
for drawing to the screen
and handling user input.
It turns out Cocoa provides an
object that's great for doing
exactly this called NS view.
By building on top of NS view,
we can provide screen save
r modules with a rich,
interactive drawing
environment basically for free.
Now,
screen save r view supplies some screen
save r specific features as well,
such as managing an animation timer.
Well, so if screen save review is
responsible for drawing to the screen,
how do you draw with screen save review?
Well, one nice thing about views
is you can configure them to
handle graphics commands from a
variety of graphics libraries.
This means with a little
bit of setup work,
you can call directly into the
graphics library you're most
comfortable with right now.
This might be Quick Draw,
or this might be OpenGL, or whatever.
There are a couple of places where
you can patch into your module's
animation loop to do your drawing,
and I'll show you some
examples of both in a minute.
In the past, you've had to worry about
drawing across multiple monitors.
One of the great things about
the screen saver in Mac OS X is
it handles multi-monitor
issues for you automatically.
All you have to do is worry about
drawing in your screen saver view,
and the system will make the
results appear across multiple
monitors in a consistent manner.
If necessary, your module can set your
screen device--sorry,
your screen depth using
Core Graphics Direct Display API.
Remember, though,
if you're going to change
the user's monitor settings,
please change them back when you're done.
So that's drawing with
screen save review.
Now, screen save review, as I said,
is also responsible for
handling user input.
So normally user events
wake the screen saver,
right?
Well, maybe you want to write a video
game in your screen saver,
or maybe you want a screen saver
that responds to mouse movement.
It turns out that writing an interactive
screen saver in Mac OS X is very easy.
The screen saver engine will hook your
module into its event loop directly,
so you can listen for and
override specific user events.
Now, this comes with a word of caution.
If you're going to override user events,
please make sure the user understands
how to wake the screen saver.
You don't want to trap someone in
your module wondering how to get out.
Most unpleasant.
In addition to drawing to the
screen and handling user input,
Screen Save Review is responsible for
some screen save specific features.
Like I've said before,
like managing your animation loop.
It also supplies some methods for
managing your runtime environment.
So that's screen save review.
Let's talk about how the framework
can help you manage your user
settings in a screen save.
Your module can supply a configure
panel the user can use to
customize the module's behavior.
You can design this panel
in Interface Builder,
like any window,
and then supply that panel
to the system on demand.
The system will display your panel as a
sheet in the System Prefs application,
like in the screenshot here.
The framework supplies an object
called screen saver defaults for
working with System Preferences.
With your users preferences, I'm sorry.
Screen saver defaults
works with your information,
it saves your preferences,
makes them available to any
application that loads your module.
This might be the
System Preferences application,
it might be the Screen Saver
Engine application,
it might be a third-party
Screen Saver Engine.
Some already exist.
Now, Foundation also comes with an
object for working with user
preferences called NSUserDefaults,
but you should avoid using
NSUserDefaults in your screen save.
NSUserDefaults stores information
on a per-application basis,
and this means that your
settings won't be available to
all apps that load your module.
So that's the screen saver framework.
Let's see some demos.
There's nothing like a good demo.
I have two demos for you today.
The first is a simple demo using
Can we get machine four?
Oh, great.
Sorry.
I'm looking at the wrong place.
So I have two demos for you today.
The first is a simple
demo using Quick Draw,
and the second will be a
more sophisticated screen
save example using OpenGL.
In the first example,
I'll show you how easy it is
to make a screen saver module.
So, in fact, Project Builder does most
of the tedious work for us.
I'm just going to create
a new project here,
and a template for screensavers.
We're going to call this Shapes.
Project Builder has created a
couple files for us automatically.
These files are for our
Screen Save Review subclass.
I've said before that
Screen Save Review is
responsible for drawing to the
screen and handling user input.
We have to override this object.
Every module has this object.
I'm not all that fast at typing,
so I'm just going to copy and
paste from a cheat sheet here.
I hope that's okay.
I want to draw using Quick Draw.
In order to do that,
I have to configure my environment
to accept Quick Draw commands.
I'll begin by installing
a Quick Draw view inside
of my Screen Save Review.
In order to do that,
I need an instance variable in my object.
I'll do that here.
I'll switch to our implementation.
Because we're going to be
working with Quick Draw,
we need to have some header
files that pre-define the
Quick Draw commands we want to use.
I'm going to paste in the Applications
Services Umbrella Framework
header to get that in there.
I'm a Corel Framework
header to get us started.
Now we need to install
our Quick Draw View.
Once we've installed the Quick Draw View,
we can begin sending Quick Draw commands,
drawing commands, to our screen save.
I will do that in our initializer,
which is a method called
initWithFrameIsPreview.
I'll walk through that here.
This is a two-step process.
The first process,
we allocate our Quick Draw View object,
and the second step,
we simply install it.
Now, in order to do drawing,
we're going to do some
drawing in Animate One Frame.
Animate One Frame is called by the
screen saver system many times a second.
You can use this to update
your module's state,
or you can do drawing.
This is especially true
of a simple module.
Because this module is simple,
I'm going to just do all of my
drawing here and animate one frame.
and be done with it.
So what am I doing here?
First of all,
we lock focus on our Quick Draw view.
This means that the
Quick Draw view is the main view.
It's going to respond,
it's going to receive all
the drawing commands that we
issue from this point forward.
It's analogous to setting
the port in Quick Draw,
for example.
Then we'll pick a random color.
The screen save framework provides some
macros for working with random numbers.
These macros use the underlying
random API in the system.
You can use them if you like.
You don't need to use them.
One benefit of using them is
the screen save will set your
random seed automatically.
Because I think they're convenient,
I will use them myself.
We'll set a random
color using RGB4 color.
We're going to pick a random rectangle,
again using our random number macros.
Finally, we just draw an oval.
How easy is that?
Then we unlock focus.
We're good to go.
That's all there is to it.
We can build this example and install it.
Now to save time,
I've pre-compiled this on the system.
We can fire up System Preferences here.
Alright,
now as promised here is Shapes and
it draws random ovals on the screen.
Excellent, thank you.
The second example I have for you is
a more feature rich OpenGL module.
I have one here called Alphabet.
Alphabet draws a number of letters on
the screen and then transitions them off
with a variety of nifty fade effects,
some expand, some whatever.
It looks like we're running in a
software renderer for OpenGL today,
but that's okay.
You get the idea.
So, this module is fancy.
It has a configure panel.
We can use that to change
some of our settings.
The alphabet also can
listen to the keyboard.
This is kind of fun.
We can actually inject letters on the
screen by typing them on the keyboard.
We'll let some of these fade away here.
I'm going to hold down Shift-M,
and a whole bunch of Shift-Ms will
appear on the screen.
Capital Ms.
So,
and I'll type my password or whatever.
Oh, I can't.
Oh, it's all here.
So, great.
When I move the mouse,
the screen saver wakes up.
Once it's finished printing all
the letters I typed on the screen.
There we go.
Let's see what that code looks like.
Since this is a much larger example,
I factored a lot of the
code out into other files.
I don't want to go into great
detail about this module,
so I'm going to instead focus simply
on our screen save review subclass.
We're going to compare and contrast
that with our first example.
Like our first example,
we install a graphic library
specific subview in our view.
In this case,
we're installing an OpenGL view.
And again, if we go to our initializer,
we see it works basically the same way.
Here I create our OpenGL view and then
we install it in our screen save review.
Fairly straightforward.
Now, because we're working
with the Configure panel,
we need to save and
retrieve user preferences.
I'm using the screen save
defaults object to do that for me.
And here we pre-declare some
default values for the screen
save for the case where the user
hasn't set up their settings yet.
Now, in our first example,
our quick draw example,
we did all of our drawing
in Animate One Frame.
Well, in this example,
I'm doing all of our
drawing in Draw Rect.
Draw Rect is supplied by the
NSView object and is called
whenever the system thinks
it needs to redraw your view.
Our strategy here is to draw our
entire scene in DrawRect and then
periodically invalidate our view
so the system knows to redraw it.
This way we make the system responsible
for doing all of our drawing.
This is more consistent
with the way AppKit,
for example, does its drawing.
This means in AnimateOneFrame we
simply take care of our module state.
This state includes things
like creating letters,
injecting them onto the screen.
Every screen save has to have
some kind of nice Easter egg,
otherwise why even bother?
For example,
we can remove letters from the screen.
When we're done with all of that,
we invalidate the view,
telling the system to repaint the
screen so our changes take effect.
That's how we draw in Alphabet.
Alphabet also responds to user events,
such as typing on the keyboard.
We do that simply by saying
we're interested in key down
events and if we get one we just
inject the letter on the screen.
And of course we invalidate the
view so the system knows to repaint.
Now, it might be that we aren't
interested in user events.
Remember, that was a check box.
Maybe the user hasn't checked that yet.
In that case,
we pass the event up the responder chain
so the next person can handle the event.
This will probably wake the screen save.
Hopefully we'll make the
screen save r even better.
We do the same with the Shift key.
That's how we handle user input.
Fairly simple.
Again, Alphabet has a configure sheet.
We tell the screen save r that
we in fact do have a screen save
r sheet and we make it available
to the screen save r on demand.
I factored most of this
code out into another file,
an object called Alphabet
Panel Controller.
I won't go into great detail here.
Ultimately, the screen save r view is
responsible for supplying the
sheet to the screen save r system.
Again, we use screen saver defaults when
working with preferences to make
sure our preferences are available
to every app that loads our module.
Now, just to prove to you
this is actually OpenGL,
I know it was kind of slow on the screen.
Maybe you think I've played some tricks.
I've, in fact,
factored all of our OpenGL code
into a format that's similar to what
OpenGL programmers are familiar with,
basically the GLUT libraries or GLUT.
I'm not sure how to say that.
Here we initialize our
OpenGL state using standard OpenGL.
Here we'll display our screen.
If for some reason our display changes,
we can reshape all fairly
familiar to OpenGL programmers.
So that's Alphabet View,
the Screen Save Review subclass
for Alphabet.
Hopefully that's enough
to get you started.
You see how easy it is to make a
screen save module first of all,
and making a feature rich screen save
module isn't all that hard either.
So that's my demo.
Thanks.
So, the system looks for screen
savers in a couple of locations.
Basically in the library
screen savers directory.
All screen saver modules are identified
by a specific file extension.
We don't currently have a type or creator
reserved for screen saver modules,
but we may reserve some in the future.
That's all there is to know
about screen saver modules.
I hope you all have fun writing them.
You can start writing them today.
Now I would like to introduce
Robert Bowers to talk to you about
the System Preferences panel.
[Transcript missing]
The architecture for System Preferences
is fairly straightforward.
It's a CFBundle.
There's a preference pane framework that
handles the communication between the
owning System Preference application
and your specific preference pane.
In fact,
your specific preference pane has
to inherit from the PrefPane class.
It's worth noting that your preference
pane doesn't have any special access
to the system over and above a
normal application on Mac OS X.
This is an important point to reiterate.
On Mac OS 9 there were occasions
where what you wanted to do really
needed to be a control panel.
That's not true on 10.
There is no specific secret
hidden access into the OS that
you get by being a Pref pane.
It really is purely an HI affordance,
a presentation mechanism for the
user to find certain controls.
In fact, to drill on that point
just a little bit further,
the recommended storage mechanism
that you use for whatever settings
the user might be making in
your Pref pane is CFPreferences.
But there's no requirement
on that whatsoever.
You can frankly do just about
anything on the back end of
the Pref pane that you want,
whether that's writing settings out to
a file or stashing variables in NVRAM or
whatever wacky settings you want to do.
My favorite topic.
So let's talk about why not to make
a Pref pane because there's actually
a number of reasons when people start
to make a Pref pane that we sort of
encourage them to back up a little bit.
So let's talk about those a little bit.
So I said earlier that our user
model for Preference panes is that,
therefore, cross-context configuration.
So settings that belong to one
specific application don't fit
well in System Preferences.
Finder preferences, mail preferences,
iMovie preferences are all
good examples of things not
to put in System Preferences.
Now, there are occasionally a couple of
gotchas there because there is this
whole concept of user-perceived settings.
So it seems like back in the day,
we had a lot of people who
were using the same thing.
So we had the same
thing back in Mac OS X.
We had the desktop picture
and finder preferences,
which ended up being an odd fit
because from a user perspective,
that's really a machine setting.
That's cross-context of all
applications regardless of the technical
implementation on the back end.
So that was a case where
we specifically pulled that
functionality into System Preferences.
Another good time not to do a
Pref pane when doing real work.
Again, there's this user concept that a
Preference pane is fairly lightweight,
ephemeral settings.
You shouldn't be able to
do any real damage with it.
I've picked this radio button,
I've picked that radio button,
it's all sort of whimsy.
So anytime you're in a Pref pane
and you're writing code that
feels like it's doing real work,
something's probably wrong.
You probably shouldn't
really be doing a Pref pane.
So examples: burning CDs or DVDs,
ripping MP3s, doing Sherlock searches,
these are all things that just don't
fit well in the user's mental model
of what constitutes a Pref pane.
When you're simply providing
status or feedback,
it's also not, pref panes really aren't
a good venue for that.
Doing docklings or even a standalone
application with a window that provides
status is a much better mechanism.
When you're doing something that
uses an application document model,
sort of the traditional
Macintosh document management,
Address Book, iMovie,
these things don't fit
well in a PrefPane.
And this last one is sort of important.
When doing something irreversible, again,
the user perception for PrefPanes
is it's sort of hard to shoot
yourself in the foot with a PrefPane.
So,
if you're doing something that there's
no way to undo or easily switch back,
then a PrefPane is a really bad fit.
Installing a software update
would be a bad thing to do.
Now that's actually an interesting case
to talk about just a little bit because,
of course,
we have a PrefPane for software updates.
But if you look carefully,
we sort of have an escape there.
The PrefPane is really only
about scheduling when the
software updates get executed.
When we actually find new software
and it gets ready to install,
that gets launched.
launched in a separate
application altogether.
That's one of the reasons why.
So let's talk about HI just briefly.
There are a couple of
nuances to keep in mind.
Here's what System Preferences
looks like these days.
So you may have noticed one of the issues
about System Preferences is that all
of the Pref panes have a fixed width.
You just don't have
much control over that.
That's the way the UI is implemented.
Now, you can certainly customize
your own view and have a smaller
view and we'll just center it
in the NSView for the Pref pane.
Or you can make it bigger
and we can truncate it,
but there's just not much
point in messing with it.
You might as well stick
with a fixed width.
Pref panes can have variable height,
but within reason.
The Aqua UI is really designed to fit a
minimum screen dimension of 800 by 600.
I think that's the original
iBook screen dimensions.
Let's say you've got 600 pixels of height
and then you subtract some space for the
menu bar and some more space for the dock
and you don't have a lot of room there.
You've got some room for variation there,
but not a ton.
and in general,
pref panes like any other application
running on Mac OS X really should abide
by the Aqua Human Interface Guidelines.
So I'm going to bring up to stage
Maxym Runov to do a brief demo on
how to create your own pref pane
and then I'll be back in a moment.
Hello, my name is Maxym Runov and I would
like to show you how simple it
is to create a preference pane.
The easiest way to do that is to use
Project Builder which has a number
of templates for this kind of things.
As you can see,
in your project window there
is a list of templates.
And here it is,
preference pane next to screen save.
So let's give it a name.
Template provides you with the standard
elements of preference pane bundle,
such as resources,
and a subclass of NSPreferencePane
which you can customize per your needs.
Here is the subclass.
Let's add a method here.
Now let's open up a .amp
file and write some code.
For this demo I'm going to
write very simple PrefPaint,
so I'll just put an S BIP here.
Now we can build user interface.
I'm going to use Interface
Builder which is a standard tool
to design user interface and to
establish connections between user
interface elements and the code.
First thing I'm going to do,
I'm going to import our header file
that interface builder will know
about our class and what it can do.
Now I'm going to set our class
to be owner of the Nib file.
Nib file provided by the template
already has a window which is used
as a main view for preference pane.
For this demo, preference pane is going
to have only one button.
So let's place it there and
let's connect it to our method.
That's it.
Pretty simple.
Let's go back to
Project Builder and build it.
If I didn't forget anything
it should build just fine.
Of course your preference pane
will be more complicated than this.
Okay, it's built.
The last thing to do is to install
Preference Pane into one of standard
locations searched by System Preferences.
For this demo,
I'm going to put it into library
preference folder within users
into preference pane folder
within users library folder.
So here is our build results, PrefPane,
drag it there.
Now let's launch System Preference.
Here it is, our Preference Pane.
Here is our BIP.
Pretty simple.
Good luck.
Back to you, Robert.
Thanks Maxym.
Okay, a couple of things to point
out that Maxym talked about
or briefly touched upon.
There are a couple of keys in
your PrefPanes property list that
you'll want to look at closely.
If you'll remember the,
or if you can remember the existing
System Preferences in Mac OS X,
there are some PrefPane names that have
actually wrapped to multiple lines.
This might be an issue for
your specific PrefPane,
specifically if you're
worried about localization.
You may find that in English your
PrefPane fits on one line just fine,
but you localize it to some language and
suddenly it needs two or three lines.
So there is a value in the P list,
the NSPrefPane icon label,
that will let you support wrapping
the name to multiple lines if need be.
There's also the CFBundle icon file,
which points to what your PrefPane icon
should look like in System Preferences.
And then of course there's
the CFBundle identifier,
which helps distinguish your
PrefPane from all other Prefs in
the System Preferences application.
Maxym mentioned briefly the
installation locations for preferences,
not unlike the story with screen savers.
It basically follows the
library preference panes folder.
There are three locations.
There's system library preference panes.
That's really reserved
for Apple pref panes only.
We're trying to...
We'll also learn how to solve
this user issue that we had on
Mac OS 9 where the confusion between
Apple provided products and third
party products got a little onerous.
So we really have one install location
for all of the Apple Pref panes
and we try and keep that reserved.
There's Library Preference Panes,
which is where all Pref Panes get
installed that you want available
for all users on the machine.
And then there's Tilda Library Pref Panes
for the currently logged in user only.
I want to point out an example of a
third party Pref pane that exists today.
So here's a pref called DocDisk.
So there it is, very straightforward,
follows the Aqua UI,
works just like a dream.
Even works on the latest build.
So that's about it.
Pref panes are lots of fun,
very straightforward,
very easy to get into.
I would encourage you all again,
be careful when you
decide to do a pref pane.
Make sure you're doing something
that fits the user's model of when
a pref pane should be utilized.
And don't do any work.
Once again, I hit the button twice.
Next, I'm going to bring up Grace Kvamme,
and she's going to talk
to you about Disk Images.
Great.
Thanks, Robert.
Sorry, I should have walked off first.
I'm Grace Kvamme, and I'm an
Internet Product Manager at Apple.
And I'm going to talk a little
bit about what you do after you've
finished your app and you're ready
to distribute it over the Internet.
So let's talk a little
bit about the goals.
Obviously we want downloads to be as easy
and full proof as possible for the user.
Currently they could be more easy
and a little bit more full proof.
The process now is where
a user clicks to download,
they have a file on their desktop
which they then have to decompress,
install,
and then remove from their desktop.
So it's quite a lot of steps.
One of the things that we're trying
to do with this process is to
minimize the number of steps and
to get it down as few as possible.
We also want to lead the
user through the process.
So that they have quite a lot of success
in getting what they want to do done.
And then lastly, obviously security is
an important feature.
We want to try to prevent any
viruses from being installed on
the user's system or chosen horses.
Let's talk about the proposed
process for the user.
Again,
we're trying to minimize the number
of steps that they have to go through.
Really, it's a three-step process,
only two of which the
user has to interact with.
The first thing is to click to download.
And then second,
we propose bringing up an
"Are you sure?" dialog box so
that nothing can be installed
automatically on the user system.
And then lastly,
we'll do an install or copy
to the applications folder.
So what this means is the user never
has to hunt around on their system
for the file that was downloaded.
They never have to decompress the file.
We do that automatically for them.
And they never have to clean up
their system from unnecessary files.
We move that automatically
to the trash for them.
So how do we propose that we
do this and what tools are
we making available to do it?
There's a couple things that are
possible for bundling your application.
The first one is application bundles
and the second is installer packages.
Application bundles are recommended and
that you use them whenever possible.
And that's as many of you know
because you can just drag and drop
them into your applications folder.
They don't need to be installed.
And And those can be
created with PackageMaker.
Installer packages are sometimes
necessary because your app may need to
have different files located on a variety
of different places on the system.
In addition to installation,
they'll display a licensing agreement,
they'll let the user decide
where to install if you want
that to be a possibility.
To create them,
you use Apple's installer.
I'm not going to go into depth into
these two tools because Jean-Pierre,
after me, will do that.
The third tool that you have at
your disposal is Disk Images.
And similar to stuff it or zip it files,
Disk Images archive
files and compress them.
But the difference with
Disk Images in Jaguar is that
we'll enable post download actions.
What do I mean by this?
Some of the new features that
we're implementing for Jaguar
are things that will enable this
process that I described earlier.
So displaying the RUsure dialog box,
copying the app packages
to an applications folder,
launching the installer,
opening documents,
and then the installation.
This could be if the thing that the
user has downloaded is a document
or if you need to add more detailed
instructions to your installation,
you could launch a
document at that point.
It will also move disk
images to the trash.
So some of you may be wondering
how do I create a Disk image?
Well if you haven't ever done
this before it's very simple.
Use Disk Copy to do that,
which you would find in
your Utilities folder.
You simply create a blank image.
You customize the size and format
of your image so that it's big
enough for your particular app.
You simply drag your files to that image.
Specify any post download
actions that you might want.
And that will be in the
GUI or in a command line.
And then format it as read
only because you don't want the
user modifying your disk image.
So that's basically it.
It's a very simple process and we
hope both for the user and for you.
To recap the process that we
suggest for the user is it
could be down to two steps.
Clicking to download and then clicking
on "Are you sure?" dialog box.
And we would do all the
work behind the scenes.
Downloading the file, decompressing it,
putting it in the right place,
and removing any unnecessary files.
The only time where a third step might
be necessary is if you're doing an
installation and the user would go
through the regular installation process.
So that's Disk Images.
I'm going to take questions later,
but at this point I'm going to
bring up Jean-Pierre Ciuda to
talk a little bit more about
Package Maker and the installer.
Thank you, Grace.
So my name is Jean-Pierre Ciuda.
I'm going to talk to you today
about the Mac OS X Installer.
So as you know,
the Mac OS X installer was initially
designed to install the operating system.
Now with Jaguar,
we are trying to address some of
the features that we were asked
to do for application installs.
In Jaguar, we've done a lot of bug fixes.
We've added a lot of new features,
and we've improved also the main
tool used to create packages,
which is Package Maker.
I'm going to talk to you today
about a few of these bug fixes,
features, and Package Maker features.
So bug fixes.
The first one is modification dates.
I don't know if some of you noticed,
but when you install a package on top of
Mac OS X using the Apple installer today,
the files do not appear right
away in the Finder window.
I wish I could have
blamed it on the Finder,
but unfortunately this
is a installer bug,
a bad installer bug.
So we fixed that.
We now changed the modification date.
We changed the modification date of the
enclosing folders that we're touching,
causing the Finder to basically
refresh the window and the
files appear right away.
We've also added a flag to the package.
When the flag is turned on, basically,
the installer will only update
existing languages that are installed.
So for example,
if you've installed an application
in German and in French and you're
now updating to your new version,
you will only update
the language in French.
And you won't end up with
200 languages -- well,
not 200, maybe 30 or 13.
We're also going to re-enable
multiple simultaneous installations.
So you will be able to double-click
several packages -- well,
one after the other,
and they will open in
three separate windows,
and they will all install concurrently.
If they required some optimization,
the optimization will only occur
at the end of the third package.
Thank you.
We're also adding a flag to the
package that will allow you to tell
the installer to follow symlinks.
So I know that's something we
had a lot of requests for that,
so we're doing it for Jaguar.
It will be off by default,
and the reason for that
is because we want to stay
compatible with the old packages.
We're also adding a new flag in the
package that will allow you to specify
the admin level of authorization.
Right now,
if you say that the package requires
authorization for installation,
every single user will
be asked to authenticate,
and we will install as root.
We're going to add a flag that
requires only admin privileges.
So for example, if you're installing
something in /applications,
and what will happen is
that when that flag is set,
if the user is already an admin user,
you won't be able to and the
installer will just go through.
[Transcript missing]
File Hinting.
File Hinting is the ability to
specify some special handling
instructions for certain files.
So for example,
if you are installing a configuration
file and there is already a
configuration file existing,
you might not want to override
it if the user has changed it.
So that could be a hint.
We're going to provide you
with a fixed number of hints
that you will be able to use.
So for example,
do not override a modified file.
Another hint could be, for example,
to say that you want to save
this configuration file and still
replace it with your new file.
So we're going to have a fixed number
of these and they will be documented,
of course.
We're also going to provide you
with the ability to find the
application bundles to upgrade.
So if the user moved their
mail.app somewhere else,
you will be able to find
it before installing.
So when I say you,
I mean you the developer will be
able to provide some instructions
on how to find the application.
And that will be the application
that you will be upgrading.
We're also going to allow you
to customize the background
window of the installer.
Right now it's the picture of
a CD-ROM with a big X on it.
So we're going to allow
you to change that.
And then we're going to
add a new package format.
The package is now going
to be a standard CFBundle.
All the information that we
store in there will be in plist.
So it will be adopting basically
a Cocoa and foundation.
Packagemaker.
So just a little correction
I noticed in the previous slide.
Packagemaker is the tool you use
to create installer packages.
So when you want to put your application
into a package you would use Packagemaker
and you wouldn't use the installer.
So Packagemaker will be used to create
new style packages and meta packages.
I mentioned to you that we're
improving the package format.
We definitely encourage you to use
this new package format because all
new features we're adding on the
installer will be available only
to new package and meta packages.
Packagemaker will now
verify the package validity.
So it will double,
you will be able to import a package.
You will be able to make sure that
basically everything is correct.
So all the necessary files are there.
All the scripts have the executable
bit set and things like that.
We are planning to add
support for all known flags.
I've been talking about three
or four flags that we're
adding to the package format.
All these flags will be
documented in Packagemaker.
You will have online help and you
will be able to know what it's about.
We're also planning to add
support for file hinting.
So all the hints that we will be able
to implement by the time we ship Jaguar
will be documented in Packagemaker.
We're also providing a lot of
information about the package.
So if you have any questions,
please feel free to ask.
We're also providing a lot of
information about the package.
So if you have any questions,
please feel free to ask.
the command line tool.
This is important if you're having
built scripts and you want to
directly create your package.
And package makers are
a work in progress.
So as we go, we will improve it.
And we will ship it via the developer CD.
So it's not something that's going to
be shipping only on the OS releases.
We're planning to improve it, and also,
we're planning to implement
a lot of your feedback.
In conclusion,
drag install is always the best
way to install an application
in the applications folder.
So you should only use installer
packages if you are planning to
install something somewhere else.
We have some future plans, of course.
It's difficult for me to
talk about it in detail,
but we're looking at things like,
of course, better tools.
We're looking at things
like package management,
we're looking at removing packages,
and things like that.
And of course, if you have some feedback,
please email John Geleynsse,
which is going to come back
to the podium right now.
Thank you.
Okay,
well let's just look at the road map.
Again, if you came in late and you were
wondering what in the world screen
savers had to do with Package Maker,
the answer is nothing.
This session was four different topics.
The last two that were related,
the first two that were
completely unrelated.
in case you're wondering.
So here's a bunch of sessions
this week that relate to sort
of the user experience overall,
some that were this morning.
Today we talked about
screen savers and screen,
and system preference panels,
how to do that, or panes.
You need to know how to
write software in Cocoa,
and if you don't know how to do that,
there's some good
Cocoa sessions to go to.
Using Interface Builder if
you've never used that tool,
you need to learn how to use
that tool before you can create
the UI for a system pref pane,
et cetera.
So if you have any feedback
on this session or any of
the content provided here,
or if there's something about the
APIs that we've talked about today
that you would like to see enhanced,
or, you know, you need some assistance
with any of this stuff,
feel free to contact me
in developer relations,
and I can drive your issues
back into engineering and try to
get them resolved or addressed,
or I can also try to get the answers
to any questions that you've got.